Sectoral Value Added Forecasting (COVID Context — France)

Overview
This project studies and forecasts annual sectoral value added in France using Banque de France FIBEN firm-level data aggregated at the sector–year level, combined with sectoral value added data from INSEE.
The objective is to estimate the historical relationship between Banque de France and INSEE series and use it to generate forecasts for the COVID period, relying on INSEE 2020 projections as an external input.

Objective
The analysis is structured in two steps:
First, estimate the relationship between Banque de France and INSEE sectoral value added over 2003–2018.
Second, use the estimated models to:
- reconstruct Banque de France sectoral value added for 2019 (due to incomplete observations at the time of analysis);
- forecast 2020 values using INSEE sectoral projections published at the time of analysis.

Data
The .dta dataset is drawn from the Banque de France FIBEN database and aggregates firm-level observations into sector–year time series.
It covers the period 2003–2018 for estimation purposes, with 2019 excluded due to incomplete reporting from the Banque de France.
Variables include year, sector, Banque de France sectoral value added, and INSEE sectoral value added.
The analysis is conducted across five French economic sectors: Agriculture, Industry, Construction, Market Services, and Non-Market Services.

Methodology
Each sector is analysed separately within a consistent time-series framework.
All value-added variables are expressed in logarithms. Lagged variables (one and two periods) are constructed for both Banque de France and INSEE series. Stationarity is assessed using the Augmented Dickey-Fuller (ADF) test.

Econometric specification
Three nested Autoregressive Distributed Lag (ARDL)-style models are estimated using Ordinary Least Squares (OLS):
Model 0 includes lagged Banque de France value added and contemporaneous INSEE value added.
Model 1 adds the first lag of INSEE value added.
Model 2 further adds the second lag of INSEE value added.

Model selection
Models are compared using the Akaike Information Criterion (AIC). The model with the lowest AIC is selected for forecasting in each sector.

Forecasting objectives
The selected model is used to generate:
- a reconstruction of Banque de France sectoral value added for 2019;
- a forecast for 2020 using INSEE sectoral projections as an external shock.

Outputs
For each sector, the script generates a PDF report structured as follows:
Page 1 — Summary of results:
ADF stationarity test, AIC-based model selection, and forecasts for 2019 and 2020.
Pages 2–4 — Regression results:
Full estimation outputs for the three models.
Page 5 — Actual vs fitted values:
Comparison between observed and fitted values of log(Banque de France sectoral value added) between 2003 and 2018.
Page 6 — Forecasts:
Extension of the series with forecasted values for 2019 and 2020.

Execution
python3 -m pip install numpy pandas matplotlib statsmodels
python3 main.py

Author
Kenza Haouche
Banque de France – May 2020
